
=pod

=encoding utf8

=head2 OVERVIEW

Convert Tiller CSV exports to QIF for import into Financial software like GnuCash, KMyMoney, Quicken, HomeBank, Money Manager Ex and many others.

=head1 SYNOPSIS

  # Command-line
  tiller2qif run --input export.csv --db tiller.sqlite3 \
                 --output import.qif [--mapfile mapping.txt]

  # Programmatic
  use Finance::Tiller2QIF;

  Finance::Tiller2QIF::ingest( input => 'export.csv', db => 'tiller.sqlite3' );
  Finance::Tiller2QIF::apply_map( db => 'tiller.sqlite3', mapfile => 'mapping.txt' );
  Finance::Tiller2QIF::emit( db => 'tiller.sqlite3', output => 'import.qif' );

=head1 INSTALLATION

=head2 From CPAN

  cpan Finance::Tiller2QIF
  # or
  cpanm Finance::Tiller2QIF

=head2 Perl Dependencies

The following Perl modules are required:

=over 4

=item * Cpanel::JSON::XS

=item * DateTime::Format::Flexible

=item * Getopt::Long::Descriptive

=item * Path::Tiny

=item * Mojo::SQLite

=item * Getopt::Long::Descriptive

=item * Text::CSV

=item * Test2::Bundle::More

=back

=head3 On Debian/Ubuntu:

All of Tiller2QIF’s dependencies are available through package management if you need to install to system Perl.

  sudo apt install libpath-tiny-perl libtext-csv-perl libtest2-suite-perl \
    libmojo-sqlite-perl libcpanel-json-xs-perl libdatetime-format-flexible-perl
  sudo cpan install Finance::Tiller2QIF

=head1 DESCRIPTION

Tiller Money (tillerapp.com) aggregates bank and credit-card transactions
into a Google Sheet and lets you export a CSV. This module ingests that CSV
into a SQLite database, optionally applies a category-mapping file to
translate Tiller's auto-assigned categories to match your accounts/categories, then emits a QIF file ready for import.

The three phases can be run individually or together:

=over 4

=item B<ingest> — parse the CSV and load rows into the SQLite database.

=item B<map> — apply a user-supplied mapping file that rewrites categories,
suppresses duplicates (card-payment credits), and assigns destination accounts.

=item B<emit> — read unexported rows from the database and write a QIF file.

=back

=head1 CLI COMMANDS

=over 4

=item B<run> -- ingest, map, and emit in one step

  tiller2qif run --input export.csv --db tiller.sqlite3 \
                 --output import.qif [--mapfile mapping.txt]

=item B<ingest> -- load CSV into the database

  tiller2qif ingest --input export.csv --db tiller.sqlite3

=item B<map> -- apply category mapping rules

  tiller2qif map --db tiller.sqlite3 [--mapfile mapping.txt]

=item B<emit> -- write QIF from the database

  tiller2qif emit --db tiller.sqlite3 --output import.qif

=item B<newdb> -- initialise a new SQLite database

  tiller2qif newdb --db tiller.sqlite3

=item B<newconfig> -- create a starter config file

  tiller2qif newconfig [--config ~/.config/tiller2qif.conf]

=back

=head1 OPTIONS

    "input":    "~/Downloads/mytillerdump.csv",
    "output":   "/tmp/tillerout.qif",
    "db":       "~/.data/tiller2qif.sqlite3",
    "mapfile": "~/.config/tiller.mapping"
  }

Pass the config file with C<--config>.  Command-line options override config
file values.

=over 4

=item B<--input> CSV export from Tiller.

=item B<--output> QIF file to create.

=item B<--db> SQLite database file used to store and transform transactions between phases.

=item B<--mapfile> File containing category mapping rules.  Optional; omitting it passes
transactions through with their original Tiller categories.

=back

=head1 MAPPING FILE

The mapping file controls how Tiller categories are translated into destination
account or category names and which transactions to suppress.  Each non-comment
line has the form:

  [AccountFilter] field | pattern | destination

Lines beginning with C<#> and blank lines are ignored.  Rules are evaluated in
order; the first matching rule wins and no further rules are checked for that
transaction.

=over 4

=item B<AccountFilter> (optional) — a Perl regex in square brackets that
restricts the rule to transactions on matching accounts.  Alternation works
naturally: C<[Checking|Savings]>. Omit to match all accounts.

=item B<field> — the transaction field to test: C<category>, C<payee>,
C<memo>, C<date>, or C<amount>.

=item B<pattern> — a Perl regex applied case-insensitively to the field value.

For a simple pattern containing no C<|>, write it as-is:

  payee | Starbucks | Expenses:Coffee

To use regex alternation (matching either of several values), enclose the
pattern in forward slashes:

  payee | /Starbucks|Dunkin/ | Expenses:Coffee

To match a literal pipe character in the data, escape it with a backslash:

  payee | Cash\|App | Expenses:Transfers

NULL field values (e.g. a transaction with no memo) skip the rule rather than
matching an empty string.

=item B<destination> — the target account or category name, or one of the
special keywords:

=over 4

=item C<source> — keep the original Tiller category unchanged.

=item C<blank> — emit no category field in the QIF output.

=item C<skip> — exclude the transaction from QIF output entirely (useful for
suppressing the credit-side of card payments that appear in both accounts).

=back

For double-entry programs such as GnuCash, destination is a full account name
(e.g. C<Expenses:Groceries>).  For single-entry programs such as Quicken it is
a category name.

=back

The optional C<default> line sets the fallback for transactions that match no
rule.  It must appear as the last non-comment line:

  default | source

If the C<default> line is omitted, unmatched transactions behave as
C<default | source>.

=head2 EXAMPLES

=over 4

=item * Map by category

  category | Groceries | Expenses:Groceries

=item * Map by payee with alternation (slash-delimited pattern)

  payee | /Starbucks|Dunkin/ | Expenses:Coffee

=item * Map by payee, scoped to one account

  [Checking] payee | Payroll | Income:Salary

=item * Scope to multiple accounts using alternation in the account filter

  [Checking|Savings] category | Transfer | skip

=item * Skip card-payment credits on the card account

  [CapitalOne] category | Transfer | skip

=item * Match a literal pipe character in a payee name

  payee | Cash\|App | Expenses:Transfers

=item * Suppress category in QIF (no L field)

  category | Miscellaneous | blank

=item * Default: leave unmatched transactions with their Tiller category

  default | source

=back

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<Finance::Tiller2QIF::ReadCSV>, L<Finance::Tiller2QIF::Map>,
L<Finance::Tiller2QIF::WriteQIF>, L<Finance::Tiller2QIF::Util>

=head1 AUTHOR

John Karr E<lt>brainbuz@cpan.orgE<gt>

=head1 LICENSE

GPL version 3 or later.

=cut